---
slug: "/harakiri"
date: "2023-04-06"
title: "Harakiri"
---

Established by Tokugawa Ieyasu after the Battle of Sekigahara in 1600, the Edo period is an era characterized by prosperity and peace in Japan. Nevertheless, it was also a period of significant social change, particularly for the samurai class. More specifically, with the end of the chaotic Sengoku period, the significance of the samurai’s identity as warriors gradually diminished. In addition, the Shogun abolished many clans and made thousands of samurai who used to serve those clans ronin, or masterless samurai. These samurai faced a new reality where they no longer had a lord to protect. In the film Harakiri, these changes have a profound impact on samurai identity and value.
</br></br>
Directed by Masaki Kobayashi, Harakiri depicts the story of a ronin named Tsugumo Hanshiro. The film begins with Hanshiro arriving at the house of a feudal lord and claiming he will commit suicide there. However, the samurai in the lord’s household believe that Hanshiro is simply seeking money and has no real intention of ending his life. Disgusted by such cowardly behavior, they demand that Hanshiro perform suicide. The story then unfolds as Hanshiro reveals the back story behind his request. 
</br></br>
Harakiri provides insight into the traditional conception of samurai in terms of its connection to the identity and honor as samurai and loyalty and duty to their lords. In the film, these abstract concepts are represented by physical objects. Three of them are the hair knot, the samurai’s sword, and the seppuku ceremony.
</br></br>
To start with, a samurai’s topknot in Harakiri is a crucial symbol of their identity. In the film, Hanshiro seeks revenge for Chijiiwa Motome, another ronin and his son-in-law, on the three samurai who killed him, not by taking their lives, but by taking their topknots (1:45:32-1:45:38 Harakiri). Hanshiro also states that losing one’s hairknot is as shameful as losing one’s life, whose disgrace is so great that even death cannot erase it (1:57:50-1:58:04 Harakiri). What this scene indicates is that the removal of the samurai’s topknot is a metaphor for depriving them of their samurai identity and reducing them to commoners. 
</br></br>
Another important symbol of a samurai in the film is their sword. In Harakiri, the samurai’s sword is not only a weapon, but it also serves as a symbol of their status and honor. Hanshiro, for instance, never considers selling his sword even when he is in desperate need of money to find a doctor for his family (1:34:10-1:34:44 Harakiri), which demonstrates his commitment to his samurai status. In contrast, when Motome has sold his sword and as a result has to perform seppuku with a bamboo sword, he is considered a great dishonor and is mocked by samurai and townspeople even after his death (1:38:55-1:39:04 Harakiri). To these people, Motome’s decision to sell his sword represents a breaking of his samurai identity and a fall into disgrace. 
</br></br>
Lastly, the seppuku ceremony plays an important part in representing the samurai’s loyalty to a clan or lord in Harakiri. In the film, a samurai perform seppuku to demonstrate loyalty to his lord by following him in death. This can be exemplified by Hanshiro’s plan to perform seppuku when his clan is abolished by the Shogun and his lord commits seppuku (00:46:11-00:46:22 Harakiri), which illustrates the importance of the samurai values of loyalty and duty to Hanshiro. Another situation happens when the samurai is defeated and wishes to avoid the dishonor of being killed by their enemy. For example, when Motome, who refuses to perform seppuku and tries to run away, is besieged, his enemy asks him to perform seppuku and die like a samurai (00:21:13-00:21:18 Harakiri). This scene highlights the lengths to which a samurai is required to go to maintain their loyalty and honor, even if it means giving up their life. 
</br></br>
What’s more, the seppuku ceremony itself is portrayed as an honorable ritual. One detail that suggests the solemnity of seppuku is that in preparation for the ceremony, Motome is dressed in pure white kimono and sits upright on a pure white square mat (00:23:50 Harakiri). As the color white is often associated with purity and innocence, it is suggested that seppuku is a sacred ceremony to wash away one’s impurities before death. These examples demonstrate how seppuku serves to retain a samurai’s loyalty and how important this value is to the samurai in the film.
</br></br>
Harakiri not only portrays traditional samurai values, but also depicts the economic struggles, social alienation, and declining faith in those values experienced by many samurai characters throughout the film. One example of their economic crisis would be that Hanshiro’s family used to live in a luxurious home with an exquisite courtyard, where Hanshiro can practice kyudo and interact with his friend (00:40:43-00:41:30 Harakiri). However, after the clan is abolished by the Shogun, his family has to move into a shabby old house (1:00:58-1:01:20 Harakiri). This demonstrates how the loss of status affected the family’s living standards. Another example is that as ronin, Hanshiro has to make a living by crafting oil-paper umbrellas (1:02:00 Harakiri) and Motome becomes a teacher (1:04:39-1:05:58). This tells us that their former status as samurai can no longer guarantee them the financial stability they once had. Furthermore, when Motome’s wife Miho and their son Kingo fall ill, Motome and Hanshiro can not raise enough money to hire a doctor (1:18:47-1:19:35 Harakiri). The inability to afford basic medical treatment reveals the harsh financial situation faced by the household. These examples demonstrate how the samurai in the film who once belonged to a powerful social group experience a dramatic decline in their economic status. 
</br></br>
Aside from financial instability, samurai in Harakiri also encounter social alienation. On one hand, masterless ronin such as Hanshiro are looked down upon by samurai who serve under the feudal lord. To illustrate this, when the samurai discuss how to respond to Motome’s request to commit seppuku in front of the lord's house, they refer to ronin as “wild dogs (00:11:50 Harakiri).” This contemptuous remark proves that these samurai view ronin as inferior and unworthy of their respect. On the other hand, commoners are not particularly welcoming to the ronin either. For instance, when Motome seeks employment, he is publicly and harshly rejected by an employer who states that he refuses to hire a samurai carrying a sword (1:15:56-1:16:30 Harakiri). This humiliating event demonstrates the suspicion that normal people held toward samurai. Combining these two aspects, it becomes clear that Hanshiro and Motome face hostility from both the upper-class samurai and the commoners, making it hard for them to find their place within society.
</br></br>
Naturally, the economic challenge and social dislocation that the samurai in Harakiri are facing make it difficult for them to uphold traditional values. For instance, in the movie, Motome has to sell his sword to pay for a doctor for his sick wife and son (1:16:33-1:16:30 Harakiri). As mentioned previously, a samurai’s sword is a symbol of their soul and identity. The fact that Motome has to sell his sword to get basic medical help is a metaphor that suggests he is forced to give up the traditional samurai code of honor due to the realities of his situation. Additionally, there is a changing perception of seppuku among samurai depicted in Harakiri. In the film, ronin pretend to ask for permission to perform seppuku on the clan’s land, when they are hoping to be turned away with money instead (00:11:01-00:11:10 Harakiri). In this way, it seems that the traditional belief that seppuku preserves a samurai’s honor is contradicted by the fact that it is used as a means to obtain financial gain. And so it is displayed that in the film, survival requires the sacrifice of samurai’s honor, and that economic instability can force them to compromise their values.
</br></br>
When such challenging conditions are present, Harakiri questions the validity of prioritizing strict adherence to traditional samurai values over humanity and compassion. More specifically, after finishing telling the entire story, Hanshiro openly supports Motome for what he has done for his family even when other samurai find it loathsome (1:38:30-1:38:53 Harakiri). Meanwhile, when asked what he would do if he were in the same situation as Motome, the counselor of the feudal lord insists that a samurai must follow through with their promises to perform seppuku (1:39:30-1:40:30 Harakiri) and argues that the world does not bend to sentimental stories (1:43:37). Here the film presents two conflicting perspectives on the issue of samurai values versus humanity. On one hand, the counselor stresses the importance of upholding promises regardless of circumstances. On the other, Hanshiro and Motome prioritize the well-being of their family over strict adherence to samurai values. 
</br></br>
The film supports the perspective of prioritizing humanity over samurai values, which is demonstrated through Hanshiro’s words. For example, through Hanshiro’s claim that a samurai is also “a man of flesh and blood” who “could not live on air alone (1:38:36-1:38:44 Harakiri),” the film points out the human nature of samurai who need more than just honor to survive that traditional samurai values fail to recognize. Additionally, Hanshiro exclaims that “after all, this thing we call samurai honor is ultimately nothing but a façade (1:39:43-1:39:50 Harakiri).” Through this remark, Harakiri criticizes the samurai who serve the Iyi clan for blindly abiding by the honor code to the extent that they have no compassion for other people. As a result, the concept of samurai honor has lost its meaning and become merely a superficial gesture. As the Iyi clan can be viewed as a metaphor for the larger society, in this sense, Harakiri questions the relevance and value of traditional samurai values in a changing society and culture where the implementation of these values conflict with humanity.
</br></br>
In conclusion, Harakiri extensively explore traditional samurai values and their limitations as society changes. Through the portrayal of the hair knot, the samurai sword, and the seppuku ceremony, Harakiri provides insight into how much importance the samurai characters place on their identity, honor, and loyalty. However, it becomes increasingly unreasonable for these characters to continue implementing the honor code with the presence of new economic and social challenges. Therefore, building on the conflict between the traditional values and the harsh realities, Harakiri challenges the samurai honor code as genuine expressions of moral virtue and highlights the human aspect of samurai beyond their code of conduct. Therefore, to some extent, this film also serves to reinvent the concept of samurai. 
</br></br>
In fact, the topics explored in Harakiri are not only relevant to the Iyi clan and the Edo period. During an interview, Director Kobayashi explicitly states that the central theme of Harakiri is opposing entrenched power and defying authority (Hoaglund 393). The film not only displays traditional samurai values, but also condemns dogmatic adherence to these traditions, which is appliable to any era. Towards the end of the film, Hanshiro discovers the Iyi clan armor and tears it down as a symbol of his defiance (Harakiri 2:04:40-2:06:10). Ultimately, Harakiri challenges us to reflect on the virtues of our own societies and consider what values are truly worth upholding. 
</br></br>
Works Cited:</br>
Harakiri. Directed by Masaki Kobayashi, Shochiku, 1962.</br>
Hoaglund, Linda. “A Conversation with Kobayashi Masaki.” Positions, vol. 2, no. 2, Duke UP, May 1994, pp. 382–405. https://doi.org/10.1215/10679847-2-2-382.
